PART I
The unusual events described in this chronicle occurred in 194- at Oran. Everyone agreed
that, considering their somewhat extraordinary character, they were out of place there.
For its ordinariness is what strikes one first about the town of Oran, which is merely a
large French port on the Algerian coast, headquarters of the Prefect of a French
Department.
 The town itself, let us admit, is ugly. It has a smug, placid air and you need time
to discover what it is that makes it different from so many business centers in other parts
of the world. How to conjure up a picture, for instance, of a town without pigeons,
without any trees or gardens, where you never hear the beat of wings or the rustle of
leaves, a thoroughly negative place, in short?
 The seasons are discriminated only in the sky. All that tells you of spring's
coming is the feel of the air, or the baskets of flowers brought in from the suburbs by
peddlers; it's a spring cried in the marketplaces. During the summer the sun bakes the
houses bone-dry, sprinkles our walls with grayish dust, and you have no option but to
survive those days of fire indoors, behind closed shutters. In autumn, on the other hand,
we have deluges of mud. Only winter brings really pleasant weather.
 Perhaps the easiest way of making a town's acquaintance is to ascertain how the
people in it work, how they love, and how they die. In our little town (is this, one
wonders, an effect of the climate? All three are done on much the same lines, with the
same feverish yet casual air. The truth is that everyone is bored, and devotes himself to 
cultivating habits. Our citizens work hard, but solely with the object of getting rich. Their
chief interest is in commerce, and their chief aim in life is, as they call it, "doing
business." Naturally they don't eschew such simpler pleasures as love-making,
seabathing, going to the pictures. But, very sensibly, they reserve these pastimes for
Saturday afternoons and Sundays and employ the rest of the week in making money, as
much as possible. In the evening, on leaving the office, they forgather, at an hour that
never varies, in the cafes, stroll the same boulevard, or take the air on their balconies. The
passions of the young are violent and short-lived; the vices of older men seldom range
beyond an addiction to bowling, to banquets and "socials," or clubs where large sums
change hands on the fall of a card.
 It will be said, no doubt, that these habits are not peculiar to our town; really all
our contemporaries are much the same. Certainly nothing is commoner nowadays than to
see people working from morn till night and then proceeding to fritter away at cardtables, in cafes and in small-talk what time is left for living. Nevertheless there still exist
towns and countries where people have now and then an inkling of something different.
In general it doesn't change their lives. Still, they have had an intimation, and that's so
much to the good. Oran, however, seems to be a town without intimations; in other
words, completely modern. Hence I see no need to dwell on the manner of loving in our
town. The men and women consume one another rapidly in what is called "the act of
love," or else settle down to a mild habit of conjugality. We seldom find a mean between
these extremes. That, too, is not exceptional. At Oran, as elsewhere, for lack of time and
thinking, people have to love one another without knowing much about it.
 What is more exceptional in our town is the difficulty one may experience there in
dying. "Difficulty," perhaps, is not the right word, 'discomfort" would come nearer. Being
ill's never agreeable but there are towns that stand by you, so to speak, when you are sick;
in which you can, after a fashion, let yourself go.
 An invalid needs small attentions, he likes to have something to rely on, and that's
natural enough. But at Oran the violent extremes of temperature, the exigencies of
business, the uninspiring surroundings, the sudden nightfalls, and the very nature of its
pleasures call for good health. An invalid feels out of it there.
 Think what it must be for a dying man, trapped behind hundreds of walls all
sizzling with heat, while the whole population, sitting in cafes or hanging on the
telephone, is discussing shipments, bills of lading, discounts! It will then be obvious what
discomfort attends death, even modern death, when it waylays you under such conditions
in a dry place.
 These somewhat haphazard observations may give a fair idea of what our town is
like. However, we must not exaggerate. Really, all that was to be conveyed was the
banality of the town's appearance and of life in it. But you can get through the days there
without trouble, once you have formed habits. And since habits are precisely what our
town encourages, all is for the best. Viewed from this angle, its life is not particularly
exciting; that must be admitted. But, at least, social unrest is quite unknown among us.
And our frank-spoken, amiable, and industrious citizens have always inspired a
reasonable esteem in visitors.
 Treeless, glamourless, soulless, the town of Oran ends by seeming restful and,
after a while, you go complacently to sleep there. 
 It is only fair to add that Oran is grafted on to a unique landscape, in the center of
a bare plateau, ringed with luminous hills and above a perfectly shaped bay. All we may
regret is the town's being so disposed that it turns its back on the bay, with the result that
it's impossible to see the sea, you always have to go to look for it.
 Such being the normal life of Oran, it will be easily understood that our fellow
citizens had not the faintest reason to apprehend the incidents that took place in the spring
of the year in question and were (as we subsequently realized) premonitory signs of the
grave events we are to chronicle. To some, these events will seem quite natural; to others,
all but incredible. But, obviously, a narrator cannot take account of these differences of
outlook. His business is only to say: "This is what happened," when he knows that it
actually did happen, that it closely affected the life of a whole populace, and that there are
thousands of eyewitnesses who can appraise in their hearts the truth of what he writes.
 In any case the narrator (whose identity will be made known in due course) would
have little claim to competence for a task like this, had not chance put him in the way of
gathering much information, and had he not been, by the force of things, closely involved
in all that he proposes to narrate. This is his justification for playing the part of a
historian. Naturally, a historian, even an amateur, always has data, personal or at second
hand, to guide him. The present narrator has three kinds of data: first, what he saw
himself; secondly, the accounts of other eyewitnesses (thanks to the part he played, he
was enabled to learn their personal impressions from all those figuring in this chronicle);
and, lastly, documents that subsequently came into his hands. He proposes to draw on
these records whenever this seems desirable, and to employ them as he thinks best. He
also proposes...
 But perhaps the time has come to drop preliminaries and cautionary remarks and
to launch into the narrative proper. The account of the first days needs giving in some
detail.
 When leaving his surgery on the morning of April 16, Dr. Bernard Rieux felt
something soft under his foot. It was a dead rat lying in the middle of the landing.
 On the spur of the moment he kicked it to one side and, without giving it a further
thought, continued on his way downstairs. Only when he was stepping out into the street
did it occur to him that a dead rat had no business to be on his landing, and he turned
back to ask the concierge of the building to see to its removal. It was not until he noticed
old M. Michel's reaction to the news that he realized the peculiar nature of his discovery.
Personally, he had thought the presence of the dead rat rather odd, no more than that; the
concierge, however, was genuinely outraged. On one point he was categorical: "There
weren't no rats here." In vain the doctor assured him that there was a rat, presumably
dead, on the second-floor landing; M. Michel's conviction wasn't to be shaken. There
"weren't no rats in the building," he repeated, so someone must have brought this one
from outside. Some youngster trying to be funny, most likely.
 That evening, when Dr. Rieux was standing in the entrance, feeling for the latchkey in his pocket before starting up the stairs to his apartment, he saw a big rat coming
toward him from the dark end of the passage. It moved uncertainly, and its fur was
sopping wet. The animal stopped and seemed to be trying to get its balance, moved
forward again toward the doctor, halted again, then spun round on itself with a little
squeal and fell on its side. Its mouth was slightly open and blood was spurting from it.
After gazing at it for a moment, the doctor went upstairs. 
 He wasn't thinking about the rat. That glimpse of spurting blood had switched his
thoughts back to something that had been on his mind all day. His wife, who had been ill
for a year now, was due to leave next day for a sanatorium in the mountains. He found
her lying down in the bedroom, resting, as he had asked her to do, in view of the
exhausting journey before her. She gave him a smile.
 "Do you know, I'm feeling ever so much better!" she said.
 The doctor gazed down at the face that turned toward him in the glow of the
bedside lamp. His wife was thirty, and the long illness had left its mark on her face. Yet
the thought that came to Rieux's mind as he gazed at her was: "How young she looks,
almost like a little girl!" But perhaps that was because of the smile, which effaced all
else.
 "Now try to sleep," he counseled. "The nurse is coming at eleven, you know, and
you have to catch the midday train."
 He kissed the slightly moist forehead. The smile escorted him to the door.
 Next day, April 17, at eight o'clock the concierge buttonholed the doctor as he
was going out. Some young scallywags, he said, had dumped three dead rats in the hall.
They'd obviously been caught in traps with very strong springs, as they were bleeding
profusely. The concierge had lingered in the doorway for quite a while, holding the rats
by their legs and keeping a sharp eye on the passers-by, on the off chance that the
miscreants would give themselves away by grinning or by some facetious remark. His
watch had been in vain.
 "But I'll nab 'em all right," said M. Michel hopefully.
 Much puzzled, Rieux decided to begin his round in the outskirts of the town,
where his poorer patients lived. The scavenging in these districts was done late in the
morning and, as he drove his car along the straight, dusty streets, he cast glances at the
garbage cans aligned along the edge of the sidewalk. In one street alone the doctor
counted as many as a dozen rats deposited on the vegetable and other refuse in the cans.
 He found his first patient, an asthma case of long standing, in bed, in a room that
served as both dining-room and bedroom and overlooked the street. The invalid was an
old Spaniard with a hard, rugged face. Placed on the coverlet in front of him were two
pots containing dried peas. When the doctor entered, the old man was sitting up, bending
his neck back, gasping and wheezing in his efforts to recover his breath. His wife brought
a bowl of water.
 "Well, doctor," he said, while the injection was being made, "they're coming out,
have you noticed?"
 "The rats, he means," his wife explained. "The man next door found three."
 "They're coming out, you can see them in all the trash cans. It's hunger!"
 Rieux soon discovered that the rats were the great topic of conversation in that
part of the town. After his round of visits he drove home.
 "There's a telegram for you, sir, upstairs," M. Michel informed him.
 The doctor asked him if he'd seen any more rats.
 "No," the concierge replied, "there ain't been any more. I'm keeping a sharp
lookout, you know. Those youngsters wouldn't dare when I'm around."
 The telegram informed Rieux that his mother would be arriving next day. She was
going to keep house for her son during his wife's absence. When the doctor entered his
apartment he found the nurse already there. He looked at his wife. 
 She was in a tailor-made suit, and he noticed that she had used rouge. He smiled
to her.
 "That's splendid," he said. "You're looking very nice."
 A few minutes later he was seeing her into the sleeping-car. She glanced round
the compartment.
 "It's too expensive for us really, isn't it?"
 "It had to be done," Rieux replied.
 "What's this story about rats that's going round?"
 "I can't explain it. It certainly is queer, but it'll pass."
 Then hurriedly he begged her to forgive him; he felt he should have looked after
her better, he'd been most remiss. When she shook her head, as if to make him stop, he
added: "Anyhow, once you're back everything will be better. We'll make a fresh start."
 "That's it!" Her eyes were sparkling. "Let's make a fresh start."
 But then she turned her head and seemed to be gazing through the car window at
the people on the platform, jostling one another in their haste. The hissing of the
locomotive reached their ears. Gently he called his wife's first name; when she looked
round he saw her face wet with tears.
 "Don't," he murmured.
 Behind the tears the smile returned, a little tense. She drew a deep breath.
 "Now off you go! Everything will be all right."
 He took her in his arms, then stepped back on the platform. Now he could only
see her smile through the window.
 "Please, dear," he said, "take great care of yourself."
 But she could not hear him.
 As he was leaving the platform, near the exit he met M. Othon, the police
magistrate, holding his small boy by the hand. The doctor asked him if he was going
away.
 Tall and dark, M. Othon had something of the air of what used to be called a man
of the world, and something of an undertaker's assistant.
 "No," the magistrate replied, "I've come to meet Madame Othon, who's been to
present her respects to my family."
 The engine whistled.
 "These rats, now?" the magistrate began.
 Rieux made a brief movement in the direction of the train, then turned back
toward the exit.
 "The rats?" he said. "It's nothing."
 The only impression of that moment which, afterwards, he could recall was the
passing of a railroadman with a box full of dead rats under his arm.
 Early in the afternoon of that day, when his consultations were beginning, a
young man called on Rieux. The doctor gathered that he had called before, in the
morning, and was a journalist by profession. His name was Raymond Rambert.
 Short, square-shouldered, with a determined-looking face and keen, intelligent
eyes, he gave the impression of someone who could keep his end up in any
circumstances. He wore a sports type of clothes. He came straight to the point. 
 His newspaper, one of the leading Paris dailies, had commissioned him to make a
report on the living-conditions prevailing among the Arab population, and especially on
the sanitary conditions.
 Rieux replied that these conditions were not good. But, before he said any more,
he wanted to know if the journalist would be allowed to tell the truth.
 "Certainly," Rambert replied.
 "I mean," Rieux explained, "would you be allowed to publish an unqualified
condemnation of the present state of things?"
 "Unqualified? Well, no, I couldn't go that far. But surely things aren't quite so bad
as that?"
 "No," Rieux said quietly, they weren't so bad as that. He had put the question
solely to find out if Rambert could or couldn't state the facts without paltering with the
truth. "I've no use for statements in which something is kept back," he added. "That is
why I shall not furnish information in support of yours."
 The journalist smiled. "You talk the language of Saint-Just."
 Without raising his voice Rieux said he knew nothing about that. The language he
used was that of a man who was sick and tired of the world he lived in, though he had
much liking for his fellow men and had resolved, for his part, to have no truck with
injustice and compromises with the truth.
 His shoulders hunched, Rambert gazed at the doctor for some moments without
speaking. Then, "I think I understand you," he said, getting up from his chair.
 The doctor accompanied him to the door.
 "It's good of you to take it like that," he said.
 "Yes, yes, I understand," Rambert repeated, with what seemed a hint of
impatience in his voice. "Sorry to have troubled you."
 When shaking hands with him, Rieux suggested that if he was out for curious
stories for his paper, he might say something about the extraordinary number of dead rats
that were being found in the town just now.
 "Ah!" Rambert exclaimed. "That certainly interests me."
 On his way out at five for another round of visits, the doctor passed on the
stairway a stocky, youngish man, with a big, deeply furrowed face and bushy eyebrows.
He had met him once or twice in the top-floor apartment, which was occupied by some
male Spanish dancers. Puffing a cigarette, Jean Tarrou was gazing down at the
convulsions of a rat dying on the step in front of him. He looked up, and his gray eyes
remained fixed on the doctor for some moments; then, after wishing him good day, he
remarked that it was rather odd, the way all these rats were coming out of their holes to
die.
 "Very odd," Rieux agreed, "and it ends by getting on one's nerves."
 "In a way, doctor, only in a way. We've not seen anything of the sort before, that's
all. Personally I find it interesting, yes, definitely interesting."
 Tarrou ran his fingers through his hair to brush it off his forehead, looked again at
the rat, which had now stopped moving, then smiled toward Rieux.
 "But really, doctor, it's the concierge's headache, isn't it?"
 As it so happened, the concierge was the next person Rieux encountered. He was
leaning against the wall beside the street door; he was looking tired and his normally
rubicund face had lost its color. 
 "Yes, I know," the old man told Rieux, who had informed him of the latest
casualty among the rats. "I keep finding 'em by twos and threes. But it's the same thing in
the other houses in the street."
 He seemed depressed and worried, and was scratching his neck absentmindedly.
 Rieux asked him how he felt. The concierge wouldn't go so far as to say he was
feeling ill. Still he wasn't quite up to the mark. In his opinion it was just due to worry;
these damned rats had given him "a shock, like." It would be a relief when they stopped
coming out and dying all over the place.
 Next morning, it was April 18, when the doctor was bringing back his mother
from the station, he found M. Michel looking still more out of sorts. The stairway from
the cellar to the attics was strewn with dead rats, ten or a dozen of them.
 The garbage cans of all the houses in the street were full of rats.
 The doctor's mother took it quite calmly.
 "It's like that sometimes," she said vaguely. She was a small woman with silver
hair and dark, gentle eyes. "I'm so glad to be with you again, Bernard," she added. "The
rats can't change that, anyhow."
 He nodded. It was a fact that everything seemed easy when she was there.
 However, he rang up the Municipal Office. He knew the man in charge of the
department concerned with the extermination of vermin and he asked him if he'd heard
about all the rats that were coming out to die in the open. Yes, Mercier knew all about it;
in fact, fifty rats had been found in his offices, which were near the wharves. To tell the
truth, he was rather perturbed; did the doctor think it meant anything serious? Rieux
couldn't give a definite opinion, but he thought the sanitary service should take action of
some kind.
 Mercier agreed. "And, if you think it's really worth the trouble, I'll get an order
issued as well."
 "It certainly is worth the trouble," Rieux replied.
 His charwoman had just told him that several hundred dead rats had been
collected in the big factory where her husband worked.
 It was about this time that our townsfolk began to show signs of uneasiness.
 For, from April 18 onwards, quantities of dead or dying rats were found in
factories and warehouses. In some cases the animals were killed to put an end to their
agony. From the outer suburbs to the center of the town, in all the byways where the
doctor's duties took him, in every thoroughfare, rats were piled up in garbage cans or
lying in long lines in the gutters. The evening papers that day took up the matter and
inquired whether or not the city fathers were going to take steps, and what emergency
measures were contemplated, to abate this particularly disgusting nuisance. Actually the
municipality had not contemplated doing anything at all, but now a meeting was
convened to discuss the situation.
 An order was transmitted to the sanitary service to collect the dead rats at
daybreak every morning. When the rats had been collected, two municipal trucks were to
take them to be burned in the town incinerator.
 But the situation worsened in the following days. There were more and more dead
vermin in the streets, and the collectors had bigger truckloads every morning.
 On the fourth day the rats began to come out and die in batches. From basements,
cellars, and sewers they emerged in long wavering files into the light of day, swayed 
helplessly, then did a sort of pirouette and fell dead at the feet of the horrified onlookers.
At night, in passages and alleys, their shrill little death-cries could be clearly heard. In the
mornings the bodies were found lining the gutters, each with a gout of blood, like a red
flower, on its tapering muzzle; some were bloated and already beginning to rot, others
rigid, with their whiskers still erect. Even in the busy heart of the town you found them
piled in little heaps on landings and in backyards. Some stole forth to die singly in the
halls of public offices, in school playgrounds, and even on cafe terraces. Our townsfolk
were amazed to find such busy centers as the Place d'Armes, the boulevards, the
promenade along the waterfront, dotted with repulsive little corpses. After the daily
clean-up of the town, which took place at sunrise, there was a brief respite; then gradually
the rats began to appear again in numbers that went on increasing throughout the day.
People out at night would often feel underfoot the squelchy roundness of a still warm
body. It was as if the earth on which our houses stood were being purged of its secreted
humors; thrusting up to the surface the abscesses and pus-clots that had been forming in
its entrails. You must picture the consternation of our little town, hitherto so tranquil, and
now, out of the blue, shaken to its core, like a quite healthy man who all of a sudden feels
his temperature shoot up and the blood seething like wildfire in his veins.
 Things went so far that the Ransdoc Information Bureau (inquiries on all subjects
promptly and accurately answered), which ran a free-information talk on the radio, by
way of publicity, began its talk by announcing that no less than 6,231 rats had been
collected and burned in a single day, April 25. Giving as it did an ampler and more
precise view of the scene daily enacted before our eyes, this amazing figure administered
a jolt to the public nerves. Hitherto people had merely grumbled at a stupid, rather
obnoxious visitation; they now realized that this strange phenomenon, whose scope could
not be measured and whose origins escaped detection, had something vaguely menacing
about it. Only the old Spaniard whom Dr. Rieux was treating for asthma went on rubbing
his hands and chuckling: "They're coming out, they're coming out," with senile glee.
 On April 28, when the Ransdoc Bureau announced that 8,ooo rats had been
collected, a wave of something like panic swept the town.
 There was a demand for drastic measures, the authorities were accused of
slackness, and people who had houses on the coast spoke of moving there, early in the
year though it was. But next day the bureau informed them that the phenomenon had
abruptly ended and the sanitary service had collected only a trifling number of rats.
Everyone breathed more freely.
 It was, however, on this same day, at noon, that Dr. Rieux, when parking his car
in front of the apartment house where he lived, noticed the concierge coming toward him
from the end of the street. He was dragging himself along, his head bent, arms and legs
curiously splayed out, with the jerky movements of a clockwork doll. The old man was
leaning on the arm of a priest whom the doctor knew. It was Father Paneloux, a learned
and militant Jesuit, whom he had met occasionally and who was very highly thought of in
our town, even in circles quite indifferent to religion. Rieux waited for the two men to
draw up to him.
 M. Michel's eyes were fever-bright and he was breathing wheezily. The old man
explained that, feeling "a bit off color," he had gone out to take the air. But he had started
feeling pains in all sorts of places, in his neck, armpits, and groin, and had been obliged
to turn back and ask Father Paneloux to give him an arm. 
 "It's just swellings," he said. "I must have strained myself somehow."
 Leaning out of the window of the car, the doctor ran his hand over the base of
Michel's neck; a hard lump, like a knot in wood, had formed there.
 "Go to bed at once, and take your temperature. I'll come to see you this
afternoon."
 When the old man had gone, Rieux asked Father Paneloux what he made of this
queer business about the rats.
 "Oh, I suppose it's an epidemic they've been having." The Father's eyes were
smiling behind his big round glasses.
 After lunch, while Rieux was reading for the second time the telegram his wife
had sent him from the sanatorium, announcing her arrival, the phone rang. It was one of
his former patients, a clerk in the Municipal Office, ringing him up. He had suffered for a
long time from a constriction of the aorta, and, as he was poor, Rieux had charged no fee.
 "Thanks, doctor, for remembering me. But this time it's somebody else. The man
next door has had an accident. Please come at once." He sounded out of breath.
 Rieux thought quickly; yes, he could see the concierge afterwards. A few minutes
later he was entering a small house in the rue Faidherbe, on the outskirts of the town.
Halfway up the drafty, foul-smelling stairs, he saw Joseph Grand, the clerk, hurrying
down to meet him. He was a man of about fifty years of age, tall and drooping, with
narrow shoulders, thin limbs, and a yellowish mustache.
 "He looks better now," he told Rieux, "but I really thought his number was up."
 He blew his nose vigorously.
 On the top floor, the third, Rieux noticed something scrawled in red chalk on a
door on the left: Come in, I've hanged myself.
 They entered the room. A rope dangled from a hanging lamp above a chair lying
on its side. The dining-room table had been pushed into a corner. But the rope hung
empty.
 "I got him down just in time." Grand seemed always to have trouble in finding his
words, though he expressed himself in the simplest possible way. "I was going out and I
heard a noise. When I saw that writing on the door, I thought it was a a prank. Only, then
I heard a funny sort of groan; it made my blood run cold, as they say." He scratched his
head. "That must be a painful way of of doing it, I should think. Naturally I went in."
 Grand had opened a door and they were standing on the threshold of a bright but
scantily furnished bedroom. There was a brass bedstead against one of the walls, and a
plump little man was lying there, breathing heavily. He gazed at them with bloodshot
eyes. Rieux stopped short. In the intervals of the man's breathing he seemed to hear the
little squeals of rats. But he couldn't see anything moving in the corners of the room.
Then he went to the bedside. Evidently the man had not fallen from a sufficient height, or
very suddenly, for the collar-bone had held.
 Naturally there was some asphyxia. An X-ray photograph would be needed.
 Meanwhile the doctor gave him a camphor injection and assured him he would be
all right in a few days.
 "Thanks, doctor," the man mumbled.
 When Rieux asked Grand if he had notified the police, he hung his head.
 "Well, as a matter of fact, I haven't. The first thing, I thought, was to?"
 "Quite so," Rieux cut in. "I'll see to it." 
 But the invalid made a fretful gesture and sat up in bed. He felt much better, he
explained; really it wasn't worth the trouble.
 "Don't feel alarmed," Rieux said. "It's little more than a formality. Anyhow, I have
to report this to the police."
 "Oh!" The man slumped back on the bed and started sobbing weakly.
 Grand, who had been twiddling his mustache while they were speaking, went up
to the bed.
 "Come, Monsieur Cottard," he said. "Try to understand. People could say the
doctor was to blame, if you took it into your head to have another shot at it."
 Cottard assured him tearfully that there wasn't the least risk of that; he'd had a sort
of crazy fit, but it had passed and all he wanted now was to be left in peace. Rieux was
writing a prescription.
 "Very well," he said. "We'll say no more about it for the present. I'll come and see
you again in a day or two. But don't do anything silly."
 On the landing he told Grand that he was obliged to make a report, but would ask
the police inspector to hold up the inquiry for a couple of days.
 "But somebody should watch Cottard tonight," he added. "Has he any relations?"
 "Not that I know of. But I can very well stay with him. I can't say I really know
him, but one's got to help a neighbor, hasn't one?"
 As he walked down the stairs Rieux caught himself glancing into the darker
corners, and he asked Grand if the rats had quite disappeared in his part of the town.
 Grand had no idea. True, he'd heard some talk about rats, but he never paid much
attention to gossip like that. "I've other things to think about," he added.
 Rieux, who was in a hurry to get away, was already shaking his hand. There was a
letter to write to his wife, and he wanted to see the concierge first.
 News-venders were shouting the latest news that the rats had disappeared. But
Rieux found his patient leaning over the edge of the bed, one hand pressed to his belly
and the other to his neck, vomiting pinkish bile into a slop-pail.
 After retching for some moments, the man lay back again, gasping. His
temperature was 103, the ganglia of his neck and limbs were swollen, and two black
patches were developing on his thighs. He now complained of internal pains.
 "It's like fire," he whimpered. "The bastard's burning me inside."
 He could hardly get the words through his fever-crusted lips and he gazed at the
doctor with bulging eyes that his headache had suffused with tears. His wife cast an
anxious look at Rieux, who said nothing.
 "Please, doctor," she said, "what is it?"
 "It might be almost anything. There's nothing definite as yet. Keep him on a light
diet and give him plenty to drink."
 The sick man had been complaining of a raging thirst.
 On returning to his apartment Rieux rang up his colleague Richard, one of the
leading practitioners in the town.
 "No," Richard said, "I can't say I've noticed anything exceptional."
 "No cases of fever with local inflammation?"
 "Wait a bit! I have two cases with inflamed ganglia."
 "Abnormally so?"
 "Well," Richard said, "that depends on what you mean by 'normal.'" 
 Anyhow, that night the porter was running a temperature of 104 and in delirium,
always babbling about "them rats." Rieux tried a fixation abscess. When he felt the sting
of the turpentine, the old man yelled: "The bastards!"
 The ganglia had become still larger and felt like lumps of solid fibrous matter
embedded in the flesh. Mme Michel had completely broken down.
 "Sit up with him," the doctor said, "and call me if necessary."
 Next day, April 30, the sky was blue and slightly misty. A warm, gentle breeze
was blowing, bringing with it a smell of flowers from the outlying suburbs. The morning
noises of the streets sounded louder, gayer than usual. For everyone in our little town this
day brought the promise of a new lease of life, now that the shadow of fear under which
they had been living for a week had lifted.
 Rieux, too, was in an optimistic mood when he went down to see the concierge;
he had been cheered up by a letter from his wife that had come with the first mail.
 Old M. Michel's temperature had gone down to 99 and, though he still looked
very weak, he was smiling. "He's better, doctor, isn't he?" his wife inquired. "Well, it's a
bit too early to say."
 At noon the sick man's temperature shot up abruptly to 104, he was in constant
delirium and had started vomiting again. The ganglia in the neck were painful to the
touch, and the old man seemed to be straining to hold his head as far as possible from his
body. His wife sat at the foot of the bed, her hands on the counterpane, gently clasping
his feet. She gazed at Rieux imploringly.
 "Listen," he said, "we'll have to move him to a hospital and try a special
treatment. I'll ring up for the ambulance."
 Two hours later the doctor and Mme Michel were in the ambulance bending over
the sick man. Rambling words were issuing from the gaping mouth, thickly coated now
with sores. He kept on repeating: "Them rats! Them damned rats!" His face had gone
livid, a grayish green, his lips were bloodless, his breath came in sudden gasps. His limbs
spread out by the ganglia, embedded in the berth as if he were trying to bury himself in it
or a voice from the depths of the earth were summoning him below, the unhappy man
seemed to be stifling under some unseen pressure. His wife was sobbing.
 "Isn't there any hope left, doctor?"
 "He's dead," said Rieux.

Michel's death marked, one might say, the end of the first period, that of bewildering
portents, and the beginning of another, relatively more trying, in which the perplexity of
the early days gradually gave place to panic. Reviewing that first phase in the light of
subsequent events, our townsfolk realized that they had never dreamed it possible that our
little town should be chosen out for the scene of such grotesque happenings as the
wholesale death of rats in broad daylight or the decease of concierges through exotic
maladies. In this respect they were wrong, and their views obviously called for revision.
Still, if things had gone thus far and no farther, force of habit would doubtless have
gained the day, as usual. But other members of our community, not all menials or poor
people, were to follow the path down which M. Michel had led the way. And it was then
that fear, and with fear serious reflection, began.
 However, before entering on a detailed account of the next phase, the narrator
proposes to give the opinion of another witness on the period that has been described. 
Jean Tarrou, whose acquaintance we have already made at the beginning of this narrative,
had come to Oran some weeks before and was staying in a big hotel in the center of the
town. Apparently he had private means and was not engaged in business. But though he
gradually became a familiar figure in our midst, no one knew where he hailed from or
what had brought him to Oran. He was often to be seen in public and at the beginning of
spring was seen on one or other of the beaches almost every day; obviously he was fond
of swimming. Good-humored, always ready with a smile, he seemed an addict of all
normal pleasures without being their slave. In fact, the only habit he was known to have
was that of cultivating the society of the Spanish dancers and musicians who abound in
our town.
 His notebooks comprise a sort of chronicle of those strange early days we all lived
through. But an unusual type of chronicle, since the writer seems to make a point of
understatement, and at first sight we might almost imagine that Tarrou had a habit of
observing events and people through the wrong end of a telescope. In those chaotic times
he set himself to recording the history of what the normal historian passes over.
Obviously we may deplore this curious kink in his character and suspect in him a lack of
proper feeling. All the same, it is undeniable that these notebooks, which form a sort of
discursive diary, supply the chronicler of the period with a host of seeming-trivial details
which yet have their importance, and whose very oddity should be enough to prevent the
reader from passing hasty judgment on this singular man.
 The earliest entries made by Jean Tarrou synchronize with his coming to Oran.
 From the outset they reveal a paradoxical satisfaction at the discovery of a town
so intrinsically ugly. We find in them a minute description of the two bronze lions
adorning the Municipal Office, and appropriate comments on the lack of trees, the
hideousness of the houses, and the absurd lay-out of the town.
 Tarrou sprinkles his descriptions with bits of conversation overheard in streetcars
and in the streets, never adding a comment on them except, this comes somewhat later'
in the report of a dialogue concerning a man named Camps. It was a chat between two
streetcar conductors.
 "You knew Camps, didn't you?" asked one of them. "Camps? A tall chap with a
black mustache?"
 "That's him. A switchman." "Ah yes, I remember now." "Well, he's dead." "Oh?
When did he die?" "After that business about the rats." "You don't say so! What did he
die of?" "I couldn't say exactly. Some kind of fever.
 Of course, he never was what you might call fit. He got abscesses under the arms,
and they did him in, it seems."
 "Still, he didn't look that different from other people." "I wouldn't say that. He had
a weak chest and he used to play the trombone in the town band. It's hard on the lungs,
blowing a trombone."
 "Ah, if you've got weak lungs, it don't do you any good, blowing down a big
instrument like that."
 After jotting down this dialogue Tarrou went on to speculate why Camps had
joined a band when it was so clearly inadvisable, and what obscure motive had led him to
risk his life for the sake of parading the streets on Sunday mornings.
 We gather that Tarrou was agreeably impressed by a little scene that took place
daily on the balcony of a house facing his window. His room at the hotel looked on to a 
small side street and there were always several cats sleeping in the shadow of the walls.
Every day, soon after lunch, at a time when most people stayed indoors, enjoying a siesta,
a dapper little old man stepped out on the balcony on the other side of the street. He had a
soldierly bearing, very erect, and affected a military style of dressing; his snow-white hair
was always brushed to perfect smoothness. Leaning over the balcony he would call:
"Pussy!
 Pussy!" in a voice at once haughty and endearing. The cats blinked up at him with
sleep-pale eyes, but made no move as yet. He then proceeded to tear some paper into
scraps and let them fall into the street; interested by the fluttering shower of white
butterflies, the cats came forward, lifting tentative paws toward the last scraps of paper.
Then, taking careful aim, the old man would spit vigorously at the cats and, whenever a
liquid missile hit the quarry, would beam with delight.
 Lastly, Tarrou seemed to have been quite fascinated by the commercial character
of the town, whose aspect, activities, and even pleasures all seemed to be dictated by
considerations of business. This idiosyncrasy, the term he uses in his diary?was warmly
approved of by Tarrou; indeed, one of his appreciative comments ends on the
exclamation: "At last!"
 These are the only passages in which our visitor's record, at this period, strikes a
seemingly personal note. Its significance and the earnestness behind it might escape the
reader on a casual perusal. For example, after describing how the discovery of a dead rat
led the hotel cashier to make an error in his bill, Tarrou added: "Query: How contrive not
to waste one's time? Answer: By being fully aware of it all the while. Ways in which this
can be done: By spending one's days on an uneasy chair in a dentist's waiting-room; by
remaining on one's balcony all a Sunday afternoon; by listening to lectures in a language
one doesn't know; by traveling by the longest and least-convenient train routes, and of
course standing all the way; by lining up at the box-office of theaters and then not buying
a seat; and so forth."
 Then, immediately following these eccentricities of thought and expression, we
come on a detailed description of the streetcar service in the town, the structure of the
cars, their indeterminate color, their unvarying dirtiness, and he concludes his
observations with a "Very odd," which explains -nothing.
 So much by way of introduction to Tarrou's comments on the phenomenon of the
rats.
 "The little old fellow opposite is quite disconsolate today. There are no more cats.
The sight of all those dead rats strewn about the street may have excited their hunting
instinct; anyhow, they all have vanished. To my thinking, there's no question of their
eating the dead rats. Mine, I remember, turned up their noses at dead things. All the same,
they're probably busy hunting in the cellars, hence the old boy's plight. His hair isn't as
well brushed as usual, and he looks less alert, less military. You can see he is worried.
After a few moments he went back into the room. But first he spat once on emptiness.
 "In town today a streetcar was stopped because a dead rat had been found in it.
 (Query: How did it get there?) Two or three women promptly alighted. The rat
was thrown out. The car went on.
 "The night watchman at the hotel, a level-headed man, assured me that all these
rats meant trouble coming. 'When the rat leave a ship...' I replied that this held good for
ships, but for towns it hadn't yet been demonstrated. But he stuck to his point. I asked 
what sort of 'trouble' we might expect. That he couldn't say; disasters always come out of
the blue. But he wouldn't be surprised if there were an earthquake brewing. I admitted
that was possible, and then he asked if the prospect didn't alarm me.
 " 'The only thing I'm interested in,' I told him, 'is acquiring peace of mind.'
 "He understood me perfectly.
 "I find a family that has its meals in this hotel quite interesting. The father is a tall,
thin man, always dressed in black and wearing a starched collar. The top of his head is
bald, with two tufts of gray hair on each side. His small, beady eyes, narrow nose, and
hard, straight mouth make him look like a well-brought-up owl. He is always first at the
door of the restaurant, stands aside to let his wife, a tiny woman, like a black mouse, go
in, and then comes in himself with a small boy and girl, dressed like performing poodles,
at his heels. When they are at the table he remains standing till his wife is seated and only
then the two poodles can perch themselves on their chairs. He uses no terms of
endearment to his family, addresses politely spiteful remarks to his wife, and bluntly tells
the kids what he thinks of them.
 " 'Nicole, you're behaving quite disgracefully.'
 "The little girl is on the brink of tears, which is as it should be.
 "This morning the small boy was all excitement about the rats, and started saying
something on the subject.
 " 'Philippe, one doesn't talk of rats at table. For the future I forbid you to use the
word.'
 " 'Your father's right,' approved the mouse.
 "The two poodles buried their noses in their plates, and the owl acknowledged
thanks by a curt, perfunctory nod.
 "This excellent example notwithstanding, everybody in town is talking about the
rats, and the local newspaper has taken a hand. The town-topics column, usually very
varied, is now devoted exclusively to a campaign against the local authorities. 'Are our
city fathers aware that the decaying bodies of these rodents constitute a grave danger to
the population?' The manager of the hotel can talk of nothing else. But he has a personal
grievance, too; that dead rats should be found in the elevator of a three-star hotel seems to
him the end of all things. To console him, I said: 'But, you know, everybody's in the same
boat.'
 " 'That's just it,' he replied. 'Now we're like everybody else.'
 "He was the first to tell me about the outbreak of this queer kind of fever which is
causing much alarm. One of his chambermaids has got it.
 " 'But I feel sure it's not contagious,' he hastened to assure me.
 "I told him it was all the same to me.
 " 'Ah, I understand, sir. You're like me, you're a fatalist.'
 "I had said nothing of the kind and, what's more, am not a fatalist. I told him
so...."
 From this point onwards Tarrou's entries deal in some detail with the curious
fever that was causing much anxiety among the public. When noting that the little old
man, now that the rats had ceased appearing, had regained his cats and was studiously
perfecting his shooting, Tarrou adds that a dozen or so cases of this fever were known to
have occurred, and most had ended fatally. 
 For the light it may throw on the narrative that follows, Tarrou's description of Dr.
Rieux may be suitably inserted here. So far as the narrator can judge, it is fairly accurate.
 "Looks about thirty-five. Moderate height. Broad shoulders. Almost rectangular
face. Dark, steady eyes, but prominent jaws. A biggish, well-modeled nose. Black hair,
cropped very close. A curving mouth with thick, usually tight-set lips.
 With his tanned skin, the black down on his hands and arms, the dark but
becoming suits he always wears, he reminds one of a Sicilian peasant.
 "He walks quickly. When crossing a street, he steps off the sidewalk without
changing his pace, but two out of three times makes a little hop when he steps on to the
sidewalk on the other side. He is absentminded and, when driving his car, often leaves his
side-signals on after he has turned a corner. Always bareheaded. Looks knowledgeable."
 Tarrou's figures were correct. Dr. Rieux was only too well aware of the serious
turn things had taken. After seeing to the isolation of the concierge's body, he had rung
up Richard and asked what he made of these inguinal-fever cases.
 "I can make nothing of them," Richard confessed. "There have been two deaths,
one in forty-eight hours, the other in three days. And the second patient showed all the
signs of convalescence when I visited him on the second day."
 "Please let me know if you have other cases," Rieux said.
 He rang up some other colleagues. As a result of these inquiries he gathered that
there had been some twenty cases of the same type within the last few days.
 Almost all had ended fatally. He then advised Richard, who was chairman of the
local Medical Association, to have any fresh cases put into isolation wards.
 "Sorry," Richard said, "but I can't do anything about it. An order to that effect can
be issued only by the Prefect. Anyhow, what grounds have you for supposing there's
danger of contagion?"
 "No definite grounds. But the symptoms are definitely alarming."
 Richard, however, repeated that "such measures were outside his province." The
most he could do was to put the matter up to the Prefect.
 But while these talks were going on, the weather changed for the worse. On the
day following old Michel's death the sky clouded up and there were brief torrential
downpours, each of which was followed by some hours of muggy heat. The aspect of the
sea, too, changed; its dark-blue translucency had gone and, under the lowering sky, it had
steely or silvery glints that hurt the eyes to look at. The damp heat of the spring made
everyone long for the coming of the dry, clean summer heat. On the town, humped snailwise on its plateau and shut off almost everywhere from the sea, a mood of listlessness
descended. Hemmed in by lines and lines of whitewashed walls, walking between rows
of dusty shops, or riding in the dingy yellow streetcars, you felt, as it were, trapped by the
climate. This, however, was not the case with Rieux's old Spanish patient, who welcomed
this weather with enthusiasm.
 "It cooks you," he said. "Just the thing for asthma."
 Certainly it "cooked you," but exactly like a fever. Indeed, "the whole town was
running a temperature; such anyhow was the impression Dr. Rieux could not shake off as
he drove to the rue Faidherbe for the inquiry into Cottard's attempted suicide. That this
impression was unreasonable he knew, and he attributed it to nervous exhaustion; he had
certainly his full share of worries just at present. 
 In fact, it was high time to put the brakes on and try to get his nerves into some
sort of order.
 On reaching his destination he found that the police inspector hadn't turned up
yet. Grand, who met him on the landing, suggested they should wait in his place, leaving
the door open. The municipal clerk had two rooms, both very sparsely furnished. The
only objects to catch the eye were a bookshelf on which lay two or three dictionaries, and
a small blackboard on which one could just read two half-obliterated words: "flowery
avenues."
 Grand announced that Cottard had had a good night. But he'd waked up this
morning with pains in his head and feeling very low. Grand, too, looked tired and
overwrought; he kept pacing up and down the room, opening and closing a portfolio
crammed with sheets of manuscript that lay on the table.
 Meanwhile, however, he informed the doctor that he really knew very little about
Cottard, but believed him to have private means in a small way. Cottard was a queer bird.
For a long while their relations went no farther than wishing each other good-day when
they met on the stairs.
 "I've only had two conversations with him. Some days ago I upset a box of
colored chalks I was bringing home, on the landing. They were red and blue chalks. Just
then Cottard came out of his room and he helped me pick them up. He asked me what I
wanted colored chalks for."
 Grand had then explained to him that he was trying to brush up his Latin. He'd
learned it at school, of course, but his memories had grown blurred.
 "You see, doctor, I've been told that a knowledge of Latin gives one a better
understanding of the real meanings of French words."
 So he wrote Latin words on his blackboard, then copied out again in blue chalk
the part of each word that changed in conjugation or declension, and in red chalk the part
of the word that never varied.
 "I'm not sure if Cottard followed this very clearly, but he seemed interested and
asked me for a red chalk. That rather surprised me, but after all? Of course I couldn't
guess the use he'd put it to."
 Rieux asked what was the subject of their second conversation. But just then the
inspector came, accompanied by a clerk, and said he wished to begin by hearing Grand's
statement. The doctor noticed that Grand, when referring to Cottard, always called him
"the unfortunate man," and at one moment used even the expression "his grim resolve."
When discussing the possible motives for the attempted suicide, Grand showed an almost
finical anxiety over his choice of words. Finally he elected for the expression "a secret
grief." The inspector asked if there had been anything in Cottard's manner that suggested
what he called his "intent to felo-de-se."
 "He knocked at my door yesterday," Grand said, "and asked me for a match. I
gave him a box. He said he was sorry to disturb me but that, as we were neighbors, he
hoped I wouldn't mind. He assured me he'd bring back my box, but I told him to keep it."
 The inspector asked Grand if he'd noticed anything queer about Cottard.
 "What struck me as queer was that he always seemed to want to start a
conversation. But he should have seen I was busy with my work." Grand turned to Rieux
and added rather shyly: "Some private work."
 The inspector now said that he must see the invalid and hear what he had to say. 
 Rieux thought it would be wiser to prepare Cottard for the visit. When he entered
the bedroom he found Cottard, who was wearing a gray flannel nightshirt, sitting up in
bed and gazing at the door with a scared expression on his face.
 "It's the police, isn't it?"
 "Yes," Rieux said, "but don't get flustered. There are only some formalities to be
gone through, and then you'll be left in peace."
 Cottard replied that all this was quite needless, to his thinking, and anyhow he
didn't like the police.
 Rieux showed some irritation.
 "I don't love them either. It's only a matter of answering a few questions as briefly
and correctly as you can, and then you'll be through with it."
 Cottard said nothing and Rieux began to move to the door. He had hardly taken a
step when the little man called him back and, as soon as he was at the bedside, gripped
his hands.
 "They can't be rough with an invalid, a man who's hanged himself, can they,
doctor?"
 Rieux gazed down at him for a moment, then assured him that there was no
question of anything like that, and in any case he was here to protect his patient. This
seemed to relieve Cottard, and Rieux went out to get the inspector.
 After Grand's deposition had been read out, Cottard was asked to state the exact
motive of his act. He merely replied, without looking at the police officer, that "a secret
grief" described it well enough. The inspector then asked him peremptorily if he intended
to "have another go at it." Showing more animation, Cottard said certainly not, his one
wish was to be left in peace.
 "Allow me to point out, my man," the police officer rejoined with asperity, "that
just now it's you who're troubling the peace of others." Rieux signed to him not to
continue, and he left it at that.
 "A good hour wasted!" the inspector sighed when the door closed behind them.
"As you can guess, we've other things to think about, what with this fever everybody's
talking of."
 He then asked the doctor if there was any serious danger to the town; Rieux
answered that he couldn't say.
 "It must be the weather," the police officer decided. "That's what it is."
 No doubt it was the weather. As the day wore on, everything grew sticky to the
touch, and Rieux felt his anxiety increasing after each visit. That evening a neighbor of
his old patient in the suburbs started vomiting, pressing his hand to his groin, and running
a high fever accompanied by delirium. The ganglia were much bigger than M. Michel's.
One of them was beginning to suppurate, and presently split open like an overripe fruit.
On returning to his apartment, Rieux rang up the medical-stores depot for the district. In
his professional diary for the day the only entry was: "Negative reply." Already he was
receiving calls for similar cases from various parts of the town. Obviously the abscesses
had to be lanced. Two crisscross strokes, and the ganglion disgorged a mixture of blood
and pus. Their limbs stretched out as far as they could manage, the sick man went on
bleeding. Dark patches appeared on their legs and stomachs; sometimes a ganglion would
stop suppurating, then suddenly swell again. Usually the sick man died, in a stench of
corruption. 
 The local press, so lavish of news about the rats, now had nothing to say. For rats
died in the street; men in their homes. And newspapers are concerned only with the
street. Meanwhile, government and municipal officials were putting their heads together.
So long as each individual doctor had come across only two or three cases, no one had
thought of taking action. But it was merely a matter of adding up the figures and, once
this had been done, the total was startling.
 In a very few days the number of cases had risen by leaps and bounds, and it
became evident to all observers of this strange malady that a real epidemic had set in.
This was the state of affairs when Castel, one of Rieux's colleagues and a much older
man than he, came to see him.
 "Naturally," he said to Rieux, "you know what it is."
 "I'm waiting for the result of the post-mortems."
 "Well, I know. And I don't need any post-mortems. I was in China for a good part
of my career, and I saw some cases in Paris twenty years ago. Only no one dared to call
them by their name on that occasion. The usual taboo, of course; the public mustn't be
alarmed, that wouldn't do at all. And then, as one of my colleagues said, 'It's unthinkable.
Everyone knows it's ceased to appear in western Europe.' Yes, everyone knew that,
except the dead men. Come now, Rieux, you know as well as I do what it is."
 Rieux pondered. He was looking out of the window of his surgery, at the tall cliff
that closed the half-circle of the bay on the far horizon. Though blue, the sky had a dull
sheen that was softening as the light declined.
 "Yes, Castel," he replied. "It's hardly credible. But everything points to its being
plague."
 Castel got up and began walking toward the door.
 "You know," the old doctor said, "what they're going to tell us? That it vanished
from temperate countries long ago."
 "'Vanished'? What does that word really mean?" Rieux shrugged his shoulders.
 "Yes. And don't forget. Just under twenty years ago, in Paris too."
 "Right. Let's hope it won't prove any worse this time than it did then. But really
it's incredible."
 The word "plague" had just been uttered for the first time. At this stage of the
narrative, with Dr. Bernard Rieux standing at his window, the narrator may, perhaps, be
allowed to justify the doctor's uncertainty and surprise, since, with very slight differences,
his reaction was the same as that of the great majority of our townsfolk. Everybody
knows that pestilences have a way of recurring in the world; yet somehow we find it hard
to believe in ones that crash down on our heads from a blue sky. There have been as
many plagues as wars in history; yet always plagues and wars take people equally by
surprise.
 In fact, like our fellow citizens, Rieux was caught off his guard, and we should
understand his hesitations in the light of this fact; and similarly understand how he was
torn between conflicting fears and confidence. When a war breaks out, people say: "It's
too stupid; it can't last long." But though a war may well be "too stupid," that doesn't
prevent its lasting. Stupidity has a knack of getting its way; as we should see if we were
not always so much wrapped up in ourselves.
 In this respect our townsfolk were like everybody else, wrapped up in themselves;
in other words they were humanists: they disbelieved in pestilences. 
 A pestilence isn't a thing made to man's measure; therefore we tell ourselves that
pestilence is a mere bogy of the mind, a bad dream that will pass away. But it doesn't
always pass away and, from one bad dream to another, it is men who pass away, and the
humanists first of all, because they haven't taken their precautions.
 Our townsfolk were not more to blame than others; they forgot to be modest, that
was all, and thought that everything still was possible for them; which presupposed that
pestilences were impossible. They went on doing business, arranged for journeys, and
formed views. How should they have given a thought to anything like plague, which rules
out any future, cancels journeys, silences the exchange of views. They fancied
themselves free, and no one will ever be free so long as there are pestilences.
 Indeed, even after Dr. Rieux had admitted in his friend's company that a handful
of persons, scattered about the town, had without warning died of plague, the danger still
remained fantastically unreal. For the simple reason that, when a man is a doctor, he
comes to have his own ideas of physical suffering, and to acquire somewhat more
imagination than the average. Looking from his window at the town, outwardly quite
unchanged, the doctor felt little more than a faint qualm for the future, a vague unease.
 He tried to recall what he had read about the disease. Figures floated across his
memory, and he recalled that some thirty or so great plagues known to history had
accounted for nearly a hundred million deaths. But what are a hundred million deaths?
When one has served in a war, one hardly knows what a dead man is, after a while. And
since a dead man has no substance unless one has actually seen him dead, a hundred
million corpses broadcast through history are no more than a puff of smoke in the
imagination. The doctor remembered the plague at Constantinople that, according to
Procopius, caused ten thousand deaths in a single day. Ten thousand dead made about
five times the audience in a biggish cinema. Yes, that was how it should be done. You
should collect the people at the exits of five picture-houses, you should lead them to a
city square and make them die in heaps if you wanted to get a clear notion of what it
means. Then at least you could add some familiar faces to the anonymous mass. But
naturally that was impossible to put into practice; moreover, what man knows ten
thousand faces? In any case the figures of those old historians, like Procopius, weren't to
be relied on; that was common knowledge. Seventy years ago, at Canton, forty thousand
rats died of plague before the disease spread to the inhabitants. But, again, in the Canton
epidemic there was no reliable way of counting up the rats. A very rough estimate was all
that could be made, with, obviously, a wide margin for error.
 "Let's see," the doctor murmured to himself, "supposing the length of a rat to be
ten inches, forty thousand rats placed end to end would make a line of..."
 He pulled himself up sharply. He was letting his imagination play pranks, the last
thing wanted just now. A few cases, he told himself, don't make an epidemic; they merely
call for serious precautions. He must fix his mind, first of all, on the observed facts:
stupor and extreme prostration, buboes, intense thirst, delirium, dark blotches on the
body, internal dilatation, and, in conclusion... In conclusion, some words came back to
the doctor's mind; aptly enough, the concluding sentence of the description of the
symptoms given in his medical handbook: "The pulse becomes fluttering, dicrotic, and
intermittent, and death ensues as the result of the slightest movement." Yes, in
conclusion, the patient's life hung on a thread, and three people out of four (he 
remembered the exact figures) were too impatient not to make the very slight movement
that snapped the thread.
 The doctor was still looking out of the window. Beyond it lay the tranquil
radiance of a cool spring sky; inside the room a word was echoing still, the word
"plague." A word that conjured up in the doctor's mind not only what science chose to put
into it, but a whole series of fantastic possibilities utterly out of keeping with that gray
and yellow town under his eyes, from which were rising the sounds of mild activity
characteristic of the hour; a drone rather than a bustling, the noises of a happy town, in
short, if it's possible to be at once so dull and happy. A tranquillity so casual and
thoughtless seemed almost effortlessly to give the lie to those old pictures of the plague:
Athens, a charnel-house reeking to heaven and deserted even by the birds; Chinese towns
cluttered up with victims silent in their agony; the convicts at Marseille piling rotting
corpses into pits; the building of the Great Wall in Provence to fend off the furious
plague-wind; the damp, putrefying pallets stuck to the mud floor at the Constantinople
lazar-house, where the patients were hauled up from their beds with hooks; the carnival
of masked doctors at the Black Death; men and women copulating in the cemeteries of
Milan; cartloads of dead bodies rumbling through London's ghoul-haunted darkness,
nights and days filled always, everywhere, with the eternal cry of human pain. No, all
those horrors were not near enough as yet even to ruffle the equanimity of that spring
afternoon. The clang of an unseen streetcar came through the window, briskly refuting
cruelty and pain. Only the sea, murmurous behind the dingy checkerboard of houses, told
of the unrest, the precariousness, of all things in this world. And, gazing in the direction
of the bay, Dr. Rieux called to mind the plague-fires of which Lucretius tells, which the
Athenians kindled on the seashore. The dead were brought there after nightfall, but there
was not room enough, and the living fought one another with torches for a space where to
lay those who had been dear to them; for they had rather engage in bloody conflicts than
abandon their dead to the waves. A picture rose before him of the red glow of the pyres
mirrored on a wine-dark, slumbrous sea, battling torches whirling sparks across the
darkness, and thick, fetid smoke rising toward the watchful sky. Yes, it was not beyond
the bounds of possibility....
 But these extravagant forebodings dwindled in the light of reason. True, the word
"plague" had been uttered; true, at this very moment one or two victims were being
seized and laid low by the disease. Still, that could stop, or be stopped. It was only a
matter of lucidly recognizing what had to be recognized; of dispelling extraneous
shadows and doing what needed to be done. Then the plague would come to an end,
because it was unthinkable, or, rather, because one thought of it on misleading lines. If, as
was most likely, it died out, all would be well. If not, one would know it anyhow for what
it was and what steps should be taken for coping with and finally overcoming it.
 The doctor opened the window, and at once the noises of the town grew louder.
 The brief, intermittent sibilance of a machine-saw came from a near-by workshop.
 Rieux pulled himself together. There lay certitude; there, in the daily round.
 All the rest hung on mere threads and trivial contingencies; you couldn't waste
your time on it. The thing was to do your job as it should be done.
 The doctor's musings had reached this point when the visit of Joseph Grand was
announced. Grand's duties as clerk in the Municipal Office were varied, and he was
sometimes employed in the statistical department on compiling the figures of births, 
marriages, and deaths. Thus it had fallen to him to add up the number of deaths during
the last few days, and, being of an obliging disposition, he had volunteered to bring a
copy of the latest figures to the doctor.
 Grand, who was waving a sheet of paper, was accompanied by his neighbor,
Cottard.
 "The figures are going up, doctor. Eleven deaths in forty-eight hours."
 Rieux shook hands with Cottard and asked him how he was feeling. Grand put in
a word explaining that Cottard was bent on thanking the doctor and apologizing for the
trouble he had given. But Rieux was gazing frowningly at the figures on the sheet of
paper.
 "Well," he said, "perhaps we'd better make up our minds to call this disease by its
name. So far we've been only shillyshallying. Look here, I'm off to the laboratory; like to
come with me?"
 "Quite so, quite so," Grand said as he went down the stairs at the doctor's heels.
"I, too, believe in calling things by their name. But what's the name in this case?"
 "That I shan't say, and anyhow you wouldn't gain, anything by knowing."
 "You see," Grand smiled. "It's not so easy after all!"
 They started off toward the Place d'Armes. Cottard still kept silent. The streets
were beginning to fill up. The brief dusk of our town was already giving place to night,
and the first stars glimmered above the still clearly marked horizon. A few moments later
all the street-lamps went on, dimming the sky, and the voices in the street seemed to rise
a tone.
 "Excuse me," Grand said at the corner of the Place d'Armes, "but I must catch my
car now. My evenings are sacred. As we say in my part of the world: 'Never put off to
tomorrow?'"
 Rieux had already noticed Grand's trick of professing to quote some turn of
speech from "his part of the world" (he hailed from Montlimar), and following up with
some such hackneyed expression as "lost in dreams," or "pretty as a picture."
 "That's so," Cottard put in. "You can never budge him from his den after dinner."
 Rieux asked Grand if he was doing extra work for the municipality. Grand said
no, he was working on his own account.
 "Really?" Rieux said, to keep the conversation going. "And are you getting on
well with it?"
 "Considering I've been at it for years, it would be surprising if I wasn't.
 Though in one sense there hasn't been much progress."
 "May one know", the doctor halted, "what it is that you're engaged on?"
 Grand put a hand up to his hat and tugged it down upon his big, protruding ears,
then murmured some half-inaudible remark from which Rieux seemed to gather that
Grand's work was connected with "the growth of a personality." Then he turned rather
hastily and a moment later was hurrying, with short, quick steps, under the fig trees lining
the boulevard de la Marne.
 When they were at the laboratory gate, Cottard told the doctor that he would
greatly like to see him and ask his advice about something. Rieux, who was fingering in
his pocket the sheet of paper with the figures on it, said he'd better call during his
consulting-hours; then, changing his mind, told him he would be in his part of the town
next day and would drop in to see him at the end of the afternoon. 
 On leaving Cottard the doctor noticed that he was thinking of Grand, trying to
picture him in the midst of an outbreak of plague, not an outbreak like the present one,
which would probably not prove serious, but like one of the great visitations of the past.
"He's the kind of man who always escapes in such cases." Rieux remembered having read
somewhere that the plague spared weak constitutions and chose its victims chiefly among
the robust. Still thinking of Grand, he decided that he was something of a "mystery man"
in his small way.
 True, at first sight, Grand manifested both the outward signs and typical manner
of a humble employee in the local administration. Tall and thin, he seemed lost in the
garments that he always chose a size too large, under the illusion that they would wear
longer. Though he still had most of the teeth in his lower jaw, all the upper ones were
gone, with the result that when he smiled, raising his upper lip, the lower scarcely moved,
his mouth looked like a small black hole let into his face. Also he had the walk of a shy
young priest, sidling along walls and slipping mouse-like into doorways, and he exuded a
faint odor of smoke and basement rooms; in short, he had all the attributes of
insignificance. Indeed, it cost an effort to picture him otherwise than bent over a desk,
studiously revising the tariff of the town baths or gathering for a junior secretary the
materials of a report on the new garbage-collection tax. Even before you knew what his
employment was, you had a feeling that he'd been brought into the world for the sole
purpose of performing the discreet but needful duties of a temporary assistant municipal
clerk on a salary of sixty-two francs, thirty centimes a day.
 This was, in fact, the entry that he made each month in the staff register at the
Municipal Office, in the column Post in Which Employed. When twenty-two years
previously, after obtaining a matriculation certificate beyond which, for lack of money,
he was unable to progress, he was given this temporary post, he had been led to expect, or
so he said, speedy "confirmation" in it. It was only a matter of proving his ability to cope
with the delicate problems raised by the administration of our city. Once confirmed, they
had assured him, he couldn't fail to be promoted to a grade that would enable him to live
quite comfortably.
 Ambition, certainly, was not the spur that activated Joseph Grand; that he would
swear to, wryly smiling. All he desired was the prospect of a life suitably insured on the
material side by honest work, enabling him to devote his leisure to his hobbies. If he'd
accepted the post offered him, it was from honorable motives and, if he might say so,
loyalty to an ideal.
 But this "temporary" state of things had gone on and on, the cost of living rose by
leaps and bounds, and Grand's pay, in spite of some statutory rises, was still a mere
pittance. He had confided this to Rieux, but nobody else seemed aware of his position.
And here lies Grand's originality, or anyhow an indication of it. He could certainly have
brought to official notice, if not his rights, of which he wasn't sure, at least the promises
given him. But, for one thing, the departmental head who had made them had been dead
for some time and, furthermore, Grand no longer remembered their exact terms. And
lastly, this was the real trouble, Joseph Grand couldn't find his words.
 This peculiarity, as Rieux had noticed, was really the key to the personality of our
worthy fellow citizen. And this it was which always prevented him from writing the
mildly protesting letter he had in mind, or taking the steps the situation called for.
According to him, he felt a particular aversion from talking about his "rights", the word 
was one that gave him pause, and likewise from mentioning a "promise", which would
have implied that he was claiming his due and thus bespoken an audacity incompatible
with the humble post he filled.
 On the other hand, he refused to use expressions such as "your kindness,"
"gratitude," or even "solicit," which, to his thinking, were incompatible with his personal
dignity. Thus, owing to his inability to find the right words, he had gone on performing
his obscure, ill-paid duties until a somewhat advanced age. Also this, anyhow, was what
he told Dr. Rieux he had come, after long experience, to realize that he could always
count on living within his means; all he had to do was to scale down his needs to his
income. Thus he confirmed the wisdom of an opinion often voiced by our mayor, a
business magnate of the town, when he insisted vehemently that in the last analysis (he
emphasized this choice expression, which indeed clinched his argument, there was no
reason to believe that anyone had ever died of hunger in the town. In any case, the
austere, not to say ascetic life of Joseph Grand was, in the last analysis, a guarantee
against any anxiety in this respect. He went on looking for his words.
 In a certain sense it might well be said that his was an exemplary life. He was one
of those rare people, rare in our town as elsewhere, who have the courage of their good
feelings. What little he told of his personal life vouched for acts of kindness and a
capacity for affection that no one in our times dares own to. Without a blush he confessed
to dearly loving his nephews and sister, his only surviving near relation, whom he went to
France to visit every other year.
 He admitted that the thought of his parents, whom he lost when he was very
young, often gave him a pang. He did not conceal the fact that he had a special affection
for a church bell in his part of the town which started pealing very melodiously at about
five every afternoon. Yet to express such emotions, simple as they were, the least word
cost him a terrible effort. And this difficulty in finding his words had come to be the bane
of his life. "Oh, doctor," he would exclaim, "how I'd like to learn to express myself!" He
brought the subject up each time he met Rieux.
 That evening, as he watched Grand's receding form, it flashed on the doctor what
it was that Grand was trying to convey; he was evidently writing a book or something of
the sort. And quaintly enough, as he made his way to the laboratory, this thought
reassured him. He realized how absurd it was, but he simply couldn't believe that a
pestilence on the great scale could befall a town where people like Grand were to be
found, obscure functionaries cultivating harmless eccentricities. To be precise, he
couldn't picture such eccentricities existing in a plague-stricken community, and he
concluded that the chances were all against the plague's making any headway among our
fellow citizens.
NEXT day, by dint of a persistence that many thought ill-advised, Rieux persuaded the
authorities to convene a health committee at the Prefect's office.
 "People in town are getting nervous, that's a fact," Dr. Richard admitted. "And of
course all sorts of wild rumors are going round. The Prefect said to me, 'Take prompt
action if you like, but don't attract attention.' He personally is convinced that it's a false
alarm."
 Rieux gave Castel a lift to the Prefect's office. 
 "Do you know," Castel said when they were in the car, "that we haven't a gram of
serum in the whole district?"
 "I know. I rang up the depot. The director seemed quite startled. It'll have to be
sent from Paris."
 "Let's hope they're quick about it."
 "I sent a wire yesterday," Rieux said.
 The Prefect greeted them amiably enough, but one could see his nerves were on
edge.
 "Let's make a start, gentlemen," he said. "Need I review the situation?"
 Richard thought that wasn't necessary. He and his colleagues were acquainted
with the facts. The only question was what measures should be adopted.
 "The question," old Castel cut in almost rudely, "is to know whether it's plague or
not."
 Two or three of the doctors present protested. The others seemed to hesitate.
 The Prefect gave a start and hurriedly glanced toward the door to make sure it had
prevented this outrageous remark from being overheard in the corridor Richard said that
in his opinion the great thing was not to take an alarmist view. All that could be said at
present was that we had to deal with a special type of fever, with inguinal complications;
in medical science, as in daily life, it was unwise to jump to conclusions. Old Castel, who
was placidly chewing his draggled yellow mustache, raised his pale, bright eyes and
gazed at Rieux.
 Then, after sweeping the other members of the committee with a friendly glance,
he said that he knew quite well that it was plague and, needless to say, he also knew that,
were this to be officially admitted, the authorities would be compelled to take very drastic
steps. This was, of course, the explanation of his colleagues' reluctance to face the facts
and, if it would ease their minds, he was quite prepared to say it wasn't plague. The
Prefect seemed ruffled and remarked that, in any case, this line of argument seemed to
him unsound.
 "The important thing," Castel replied, "isn't the soundness or otherwise of the
argument, but for it to make you think." Rieux, who had said nothing so far, was asked
for his opinion.
 "We are dealing," he said, "with a fever of a typhoidal nature, accompanied by
vomiting and buboes. I have incised these buboes and had the pus analyzed; our
laboratory analyst believes he has identified the plague bacillus. But I am bound to add
that there are specific modifications that don't quite tally with the classical description of
the plague bacillus."
 Richard pointed out that this justified a policy of wait-and-see; anyhow, it would
be wise to await the statistical report on the series of analyses that had been going on for
several days.
 "When a microbe," Rieux said, "after a short intermission can quadruple in three
days' time the volume of the spleen, can swell the mesenteric ganglia to the size of an
orange and give them the consistency of gruel, a policy of wait-and-see is, to say the least
of it, unwise. The foci of infection are steadily extending. Judging by the rapidity with
which the disease is spreading, it may well, unless we can stop it, kill off half the town
before two months are out. That being so, it has small importance whether you call it 
plague or some rare kind of fever. The important thing is to prevent its killing off half the
population of this town."
 Richard said it was a mistake to paint too gloomy a picture, and, moreover, the
disease hadn't been proved to be contagious; indeed, relatives of his patients, living under
the same roof, had escaped it.
 "But others have died," Rieux observed. "And obviously contagion is never
absolute; otherwise you'd have a constant mathematical progression and the death-rate
would rocket up catastrophically. It's not a question of painting too black a picture. It's a
question of taking precautions."
 Richard, however, summing up the situation as he saw it, pointed out that, if the
epidemic did not cease spontaneously, it would be necessary to apply the rigorous
prophylactic measures laid down in the Code. And, to do this, it would be necessary to
admit officially that plague had broken out. But of this there was no absolute certainty;
therefore any hasty action was to be deprecated.
 Rieux stuck to his guns. "The point isn't whether the measures provided for in the
Code are rigorous, but whether they are needful to prevent the death of half the
population. All the rest is a matter of administrative action, and I needn't remind you that
our constitution has provided for such emergencies by empowering prefects to issue the
necessary orders."
 "Quite true," the Prefect assented, "but I shall need your professional declaration
that the epidemic is one of plague."
 "If we don't make that declaration," Rieux said, "there's a risk that half the
population may be wiped out."
 Richard cut in with some impatience.
 "The truth is that our colleague is convinced it's plague; his description of the
syndrome proved it."
 Rieux replied that he had not described a "syndrome," but merely what he'd seen
with his own eyes. And what he'd seen was buboes, and high fever accompanied by
delirium, ending fatally within forty-eight hours. Could Dr. Richard take the
responsibility of declaring that the epidemic would die out without the imposition of
rigorous prophylactic measures?
 Richard hesitated, then fixed his eyes on Rieux.
 "Please answer me quite frankly. Are you absolutely convinced it's plague?"
 "You're stating the problem wrongly. It's not a question of the term I use; it's a
question of time."
 "Your view, I take it," the Prefect put in, "is this. Even if it isn't plague, the
prophylactic measures enjoined by law for coping with a state of plague should be put
into force immediately?"
 "If you insist on my having a View,' that conveys it accurately enough."
 The doctors confabulated. Richard was their spokesman:
 "It comes to this. We are to take the responsibility of acting as though the
epidemic were plague."
 This way of putting it met with general approval.
 "It doesn't matter to me," Rieux said, "how you phrase it. My point is that we
should not act as if there were no likelihood that half the population would be wiped out;
for then it would be." 
 Followed by scowls and protestations, Rieux left the committee-room. Some
minutes later, as he was driving down a back street redolent of fried fish and urine, a
woman screaming in agony, her groin dripping blood, stretched out her arms toward him.
ON the day after the committee meeting the fever notched another small advance.
 It even found its way into the papers, but discreetly; only a few brief references to
it were made. On the following day, however, Rieux observed that small official notices
had been just put up about the town, though in places where they would not attract much
attention. It was hard to find in these notices any indication that the authorities were
facing the situation squarely.
 The measures enjoined were far from Draconian and one had the feeling that
many concessions had been made to a desire not to alarm the public. The instructions
began with a bald statement that a few cases of a malignant fever had been reported in
Oran; it was not possible as yet to say if this fever was contagious. The symptoms were
not so marked as to be really perturbing and the authorities felt sure they could rely on
the townspeople to treat the situation with composure. None the less, guided by a spirit of
prudence that all would appreciate, the Prefect was putting into force some precautionary
measures. If these measures were carefully studied and properly applied, they would
obviate any risk of an epidemic. This being so, the Prefect felt no doubt that everybody in
his jurisdiction would wholeheartedly second his personal efforts.
 The notice outlined the general program that the authorities had drawn up. It
included a systematic extermination of the rat population by injecting poison gas into the
sewers, and a strict supervision of the water-supply. The townspeople were advised to
practice extreme cleanliness, and any who found fleas on their persons were directed to
call at the municipal dispensaries. Also heads of households were ordered promptly to
report any fever case diagnosed by their doctors and to permit the isolation of sick
members of their families in special wards at the hospital. These wards, it was explained,
were equipped to provide patients with immediate treatment and ensure the maximum
prospect of recovery. Some supplementary regulations enjoined compulsory disinfection
of the sickroom and of the vehicle in which the patient traveled.
 For the rest, the Prefect confined himself to advising all who had been in contact
with the patient to consult the sanitary inspector and strictly to follow his advice.
 Dr. Rieux swung round brusquely from the poster and started back to his surgery.
 Grand, who was awaiting him there, raised his arms dramatically when the doctor
entered.
 "Yes," Rieux said, "I know. The figures are rising."
 On the previous day ten deaths had been reported. The doctor told Grand that he
might be seeing him in the evening, as he had promised to visit Cottard.
 "An excellent idea," Grand said. "You'll do him good. As a matter of fact, I find
him greatly changed."
 "In what way?"
 "He's become amiable."
 "Wasn't he amiable before?"
 Grand seemed at a loss. He couldn't say that Cottard used to be unamiable; the
term wouldn't have been correct. But Cottard was a silent, secretive man, with something 
about him that made Grand think of a wild boar. His bedroom, meals at a cheap
restaurant, some rather mysterious comings and goings, these were the sum of Cottard's
days. He described himself as a traveling salesman in wines and spirits. Now and then he
was visited by two or three men, presumably customers.
 Sometimes in the evening he would go to a movie across the way. In this
connection Grand mentioned a detail he had noticed, that Cottard seemed to have a
preference for gangster films. But the thing that had struck him most about the man was
his aloofness, not to say his mistrust of everyone he met.
 And now, so Grand said, there had been a complete change.
 "I don't quite know how to put it, but I must say I've an impression that he is
trying to make himself agreeable to all and sundry, to be in everybody's good books.
Nowadays he often talks to me, he suggests we should go out together, and I can't bring
myself to refuse. What's more, he interests me, and of course I saved his life."
 Since his attempt at suicide Cottard had had no more visitors. In the streets, in
shops, he was always trying to strike up friendships. To the grocer he was all affability;
no one could take more pains than he to show his interest in the tobacconist's gossip.
 "This particular tobacconist, a woman, by the way," Grand explained, "is a holy
terror. I told Cottard so, but he replied that I was prejudiced and she had plenty of good
points, only one had to find them out."
 On two or three occasions Cottard had invited Grand to come with him to the
luxury restaurants and cafes of the town, which he had recently taken to patronizing.
 "There's a pleasant atmosphere in them," he explained, "and then one's in good
company."
 Grand noticed that the staff made much of Cottard and he soon discovered why,
when he saw the lavish tips his companion gave. The traveling salesman seemed greatly
to appreciate the amiability shown him in return for his largesse. One day when the head
waiter had escorted him to the door and helped him into his overcoat, Cottard said to
Grand:
 "He's a nice fellow, and he'd make a good witness."
 "A witness? I don't follow."
 Cottard hesitated before answering.
 "Well, he could say I'm not really a bad kind of man."
 But his humor had its ups and downs. One day when the grocer had shown less
affability, he came home in a tearing rage.
 "He's siding with the others, the swine!"
 "With what others?"
 "The whole damned lot of them."
 Grand had personally witnessed an odd scene that took place at the tobacconist's.
An animated conversation was in progress and the woman behind the counter started
airing her views about a murder case that had created some stir in Algiers. A young
commercial employee had killed an Algerian on a beach.
 "I always say," the woman began, "if they clapped all that scum in jail, decent
folks could breathe more freely."
 She was too much startled by Cottard's reaction, he dashed out of the shop
without a word of excuse, to continue. Grand and the woman gazed after him,
dumbfounded.